 PowerPoint Presentation C. E. Byrd High School Fine Arts Survey March 2020 * * This corresponds to the Louisiana Department of Education Benchmarks Section 907 at VA-CE-H1 and VA-CE-H2 and Section 917 at VA-AP-H1 and VA-AP-H2 and VA-AP-H6 Our first objective is to understand themes of imagery and ideas found within Mannerist Art and Baroque Art and also to comprehend a variety of different techniques to create visual expressions and communications from the years 1520 to 1675. This corresponds to Benchmark Sections 907 VA-CE-H1 and 907 VA-CE-H2. Our second objective is to develop a vocabulary of the Fine Arts. This corresponds to Benchmark Section 917 VA-AP-H1. Our third objective is to distinguish unique characteristics of art as they reflect qualities of life in various cultures (such as Spanish.
 Italian.
 English.
 and Dutch).
 and we are to see how the visual arts become a vital part of a community (in such cities as Toledo.
 Rome.
 London.
 and Amsterdam). This corresponds to Benchmark Sections 917 VA-AP-H2 and 917 VA-AP-H6. MANNERISM AND BAROQUE (in Italy and in Spain) MANNERISM AND BAROQUE (in Italy and in Spain) MANNERISM is a European Art Style that developed between 1520 and 1600. It is a style that rejected the calm balance and the harmony of the Renaissance in favor of emotion and distortion as typified by elongated forms and dramatic movement Jacopo da Pontormo (1494 to 1557) was a Mannerist painter and portrait painter. Although he actually lived during the Italian Renaissance (1453 to 1576).
 his style is consistent with the Mannerist Movement. He is famous for his use of twisting poses.
 coupled with ambiguous perspective.
 and his figures seem to float in an environment that is unhampered by gravity. The sketch of Dead in the Last Judgment is all that survives from his fresco of The Last Judgment Deposition from the Cross by Jacopo da Pontormo His figures seem to float in an environment that is unhampered by gravity. Visitation by Jacopo da Pontormo Joseph in Egypt by Jacopo da Pontormo Portrait of Cosimo il Vecchio by Jacopo da Pontormo Lady with a Basket of Spindles by Jacopo da Pontormo Domenikos Theotocopoulos was otherwise known as El Greco. He lived from 1541 to 1614. El Greco discarded classicist criteria such as measure and proportion. He believed that grace is the supreme quest of art. El Greco regarded color as the most important and the most ungovernable element of painting.
 and he declared that color had primacy over form. Portrait of a Man by El Greco (but presumed to be his self-portrait) The Burial of Count Orgaz by El Greco He believed that grace is the supreme quest of art. The Assumption of the Virgin by El Greco He discarded classicist criteria such as measure and proportion. The Disrobing of Christ by El Greco He regarded color as the most important and the most ungovernable element of painting. View of Toledo by El Greco He declared that color had primacy over form. Giambologna (born as Jean Boulogne).
 lived from 1529 to 1608.
 created statues with a fine sense of action and movement The Rape of the Sabine Women by Giambologna The Rape of the Sabine Women by Giambologna Giambologna created a sculpture with no principal viewpoints. It is one spiral as the figures appear to be within a tall and narrow cylinder. Hercules and Nessus by Giambologna Samson Slaying a Philistine by Giambologna Venus by Giambologna Annibale Carracci (1560 to 1609) used sharp and heavy brushstrokes and wanted to create well designed facial features The Bean Eater was completed in 1585 by Annibale Carracci The Butcher's Shop was completed in 1590 by Annibale Carracci Fishing was completed about 1595 by Annibale Carracci Hunting was completed about 1595 by Annibale Carracci MANNERISM AND BAROQUE (in Italy and in Spain) BAROQUE ART is the art style of the Seventeenth Century in which artists sought movement.
 contrast.
 emotional intensity.
 and variety along with an ornamental style in their work. Baroque comes from the Portuguese word “barroco” for an irregularly shaped pearl. BAROQUE (in Flanders.
 Holland.
 and France) OK OK OK I have to say it: “Hey.
 look at that work of art! Do you think its BAROQUE.
” “Why.
 did you BA-RAKE it.
” Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio (1571 to 1610).
 more commonly known as Caravaggio.
 was an early Baroque painter. He attempted to combine a realistic observation of the human state.
 both physical and emotional.
 with a dramatic use of lighting. David with the Head of Goliath Caravaggio was the master of chiaroscuro (“light-dark”) which is a clear tonal contrast of light and shadow (or darkness) The Crucifixion of Saint Peter The Taking of Christ by Caravaggio The Supper at Emmaus by Caravaggio The Calling of Saint Matthew by Caravaggio was completed in 1600. It shows the collision of two worlds—the temporal and the eternal—as a daily routine is interrupted by the miraculous. Saint Matthew himself is a person in collision as he does not think that Jesus really is calling him (he points to another man) while at the same time in his heart he has already become a follower of Christ. The Cardsharps by Caravaggio Saint Jerome and the Angel of Judgment Jusepe de Ribera (1591 to 1652) reflected the coarse and the gloomy in his paintings. Prometheus by Jusepe de Ribera The Martyrdom of Saint Philip by Jusepe de Ribera Judith and Maidservant with the Head of Holofernes by Artemisia Gentileschi David by Gianlorenzo Bernini The Ecstasy of Saint Theresa by Gianlorenzo Bernini Diego Velázquez (1599 to 1660) was a Spanish Baroque painter Self-Portrait The Water Carrier of Seville by Diego Velazquez Portrait of Pope Innocent X by Diego Velazquez In 2009.
 Portrait of a Man was determined to be the work of Diego Velazquez The Maids of Honor by Diego Velazquez He completed the painting in 1656. Was he hinting that Spain was on the decline.
 