Chapter Introduction 	Climate and Vegetation Chapter Summary & Study Guide Chapter Assessment Click on a hyperlink to view the corresponding slides.
	Contents Intro 1 

Section 1-5 
	At nearly 27,000 square miles (69,500 sq. km), Lake Victoria is the world’s second-largest freshwater lake, after Lake Superior in North America.
	Lake Albert, named for Queen Victoria’s husband, Prince Albert, is much smaller, at only a little over 2,000 square miles (5,300 sq. km).
	However, it is nearly  100 feet deeper than Lake Victoria, which is substantially shallower than most of the world’s other large lakes.


Section 1-6 
	Plateaus, Mountains, and Highlands  Africa south of the Sahara is a series of plateaus that rise in elevation from the coast inland and from west to east.
	The Ruwenzori Mountains, which form the border between Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, are  one of the few mountain ranges in  the region.


Section 1-7 
	The Great Rift Valley  The Great Rift Valley, stretching from Syria to Mozambique, was formed millions of years ago by shifting tectonic plates.
	Volcanic mountains, including Kilimanjaro, rise at its edges, and  deep lakes run parallel to its length.


Section 1-10 
	Land of Lakes  Most of the region’s lakes are near the Great Rift Valley.
	Lake Victoria, the largest lake in Africa, lies between the eastern and western branches of the Great Rift.


Section 1-11 
	A Lake Meets Many Needs  The human-made Lake Volta in West Africa was created in the 1960s by damming the Volta River.
	The lake is a source of hydroelectric power and supplies water for irrigation farming.
	It also has an abundance of fish.
	Water Systems (cont.) 

Section 1-12 
	River Basins  The Niger River, the main artery of western Africa, flows 2,600 miles (4,184 km) northeast and then curves southeast.
	As the river nears the Atlantic Ocean  at Nigeria’s coast, it forms a delta 150 miles (241 km) long.
	The 2,900 miles (4,667 km) of the Congo River form the largest network  of navigable waterways on the continent.
	Water Systems (cont.) 

Section 1-14 
	Daunting Physical Barriers   Between the late 1400s and early  1700s, Europeans were limited to  trading with Africans from offshore islands or at coastal forts.
	Inland water travel was nearly impossible because of waterfalls, rapids, sandbars, and sometimes  dry riverbeds.
	Water is an abundant resource for irrigation and hydroelectric power, but irregular and unpredictable rainfall poses a challenge to the control and use of this power.
	Solar power provides a vital source of power to rural areas.
	Between 1986 and 1996, 20,000 small-scale solar power systems were installed in Kenya.


Section 1-16 
	Mineral resources of the region include oil, uranium, diamonds, and about half the world’s supply of gold.
	(page 504) End of Section 1 

Section 2-5 
	The dry climate of Namibia has contributed to the preservation of the rock art of ancient peoples.
	Granite caves and rock shelters house a great variety of images of hunters, as well as of giraffes, antelopes, and other animals, painted in warm pigments of red, yellow, ochre, and brown.
	These caves were  first occupied around 800 B.C.
	Although paintings from this period have long faded, many later ones remain intact.
	The region has warm temperatures and receives 60 inches of rain each year.


Section 2-6 
	Tropical Rain Forest  Dense tropical rain forest covers the land near the Equator in central Africa.
	Farmers and loggers are clear-cutting so much land that the rain forest may disappear.


Section 2-7 
	Cutting Crops at a Cost  Cash crops  in rain forest areas include bananas, pineapples, coffee, cocoa, and rubber grown on large plantations.
	Tropical Climate (cont.) 

Section 2-8 
	Savanna  Savanna, or tropical grassland with scattered trees, covers about half of Africa.
	The harmattan–hot, dry air from the Sahara–dries the moisture left from heavy summer rains, while cool, humid air blows in from the southwest.


Section 2-11 
	Steppe  A semiarid steppe separates  the savanna from the desert.
	The northern edge of the steppe–the Sahel–has natural pastures of grasses, shrubs, and acacia trees.


Section 2-12 
	Desertification  Increasing amounts of productive land in the Sahel has turned into desert.
	People have stripped more and more  of the steppe’s vegetation for firewood or farming.
	As a result, desertification has advanced, stressing human and animal populations that struggle to survive.


Section 2-13 
	Desert  Isolated parts of southern Africa are deserts.
	The Namib Desert runs along the Atlantic coast of Namibia.
	The Kalahari Desert occupies eastern Namibia, most of Botswana, and part  of South Africa.
	Dry Climates (cont.) 

Section 2-15 
	Moderate Climates Coastal areas of South Africa and highlands regions in East Africa enjoy moderate climates with comfortable temperatures and enough rain for farming.
	End of Section 2 